Troubleshooting a dual kernel configuration
===========================================

This page is a troubleshooting guide enumerating known issues
with dual kernel Xenomai configurations.

[TIP]
If running any release from the Xenomai 2 series, or a Xenomai 3
release using the *Cobalt* real-time core, then you are using a dual
kernel configuration, and this document was meant for you.  Xenomai 3
over the *Mercury* core stands for a single kernel configuration
instead, for which you can find specific
link:troubleshooting-a-single-kernel-configuration/[troubleshooting
information here].

== Kernel-related issues

[[kconf]]
=== Common kernel configuration issues

When configuring the Linux kernel, some options should be avoided.

CONFIG_CPU_FREQ:: This allows the CPU frequency to be modulated with
workload, but many CPUs change the TSC counting frequency also, which
makes it useless for accurate timing when the CPU clock can
change. Also some CPUs can take several milliseconds to ramp up to
full speed.

CONFIG_CPU_IDLE:: Allows the CPU to enter deep sleep states,
increasing the time it takes to get out of these sleep states, hence
the latency of an idle system. Also, on some CPU, entering these deep
sleep states causes the timers used by Xenomai to stop functioning.

CONFIG_KGDB:: This option should not be enabled, except with x86.

CONFIG_CONTEXT_TRACKING_FORCE:: This option which appeared in kernel
3.8 is forced off by I-pipe patches since 3.14 onward, as it is
incompatible with interrupt pipelining, and has no upside for regular
users. However, you have to manually disable it for older kernels when
present. Common effects observed with this feature enabled include
RCU-related kernel warnings during real-time activities, and
pathologically high latencies.

=== Kernel hangs after "Uncompressing Linux... done, booting the kernel."

This means that the kernel crashes before the console is enabled. You
should enable the +CONFIG_EARLY_PRINTK+ option. For some architectures
(blackfin, x86, arm), enabling this option also requires passing the
+earlyprintk+ parameter on the kernel command line. See
'Documentation/kernel-parameters.txt' for possible values.

For the ARM architecture, you have to enable +CONFIG_DEBUG_KERNEL+ and
+CONFIG_DEBUG_LL+ in order to be able to enable +CONFIG_EARLY_PRINTK+.

=== Kernel OOPSes

Please make sure to check the <<kconf,"Kernel configuration">> section
first.

If nothing seems wrong there, try capturing the OOPS information using
a _serial console_ or _netconsole_, then post it to the
mailto:xenomai@xenomai.org[xenomai mailing list], along with the
kernel configuration file (aka `.config`) matching the kernel build.

=== Kernel boots but does not print any message

Your distribution may be configured to pass the +quiet+ option on the
kernel command line. In this case, the kernel does not print all the
log messages, however, they are still available using the +dmesg+
command.

[[kerror]]
=== Kernel log displays Xenomai or I-pipe error messages

[[no-timer]]
==== I-pipe: could not find timer for cpu #N

The most probable reason is that no hardware timer chip is available
for Xenomai timing operations.

Check that you did not enable some of the conflicting options listed
in the <<kconf,"Kernel configuration">> section.

With AMD x86_64 CPUs:: You will most likely also see the following
message:
--------------------------------------------
I-pipe: cannot use LAPIC as a tick device
I-pipe: disable C1E power state in your BIOS
--------------------------------------------
The interrupt pipeline outputs this message if C1E option is enabled
in the BIOS. To fix this issue, disable C1E support in the BIOS. In
some Award BIOS this option is located in the +Advanced BIOS
Features->+ menu (+AMD C1E Support+).

[WARNING]
Disabling the +AMD K8 Cool&Quiet+ feature in the BIOS will *NOT* solve
this problem.

With other CPU architectures:: The interrupt pipeline implementation
may lack a registration for a hardware timer available to Xenomai
timing operations (e.g. a call to +ipipe_timer_register()+).

If you are working on porting the interrupt pipeline to some ARM SoC,
you may want to have a look at this
link:porting-xenomai-to-a-new-arm-soc/#The_general_case[detailed
information].

[[SMI]]
==== SMI-enabled chipset found, but SMI workaround disabled

You may have an issue with System Management Interrupts on your x86
platform. You may want to look at
link:dealing-with-x86-smi-troubles/[this document].

=== Xenomai and Linux devices share the same IRQ vector

This x86-specific issue might still happen on legacy hardware with no
MSI support. See
link:what-if-xenomai-and-linux-devices-share-the-same-IRQ[this
article] from the Knowledge Base.

=== Kernel issues specific to the Xenomai 2.x series

==== system init failed, code -19

See <<no-timer, this entry>>.

==== system init failed, code -22

On the ppc64 platform, check whether +CONFIG_PPC_64K_PAGES+ is defined
in your kernel configuration. If so, then you likely need to raise all
Xenomai parameters defining the size of internal heaps, such as
+CONFIG_XENO_OPT_SYS_HEAPSZ+, +CONFIG_XENO_OPT_GLOBAL_SEM_HEAPSZ+ and
+CONFIG_XENO_OPT_SEM_HEAPSZ+, so that (size / 64k) > 2. The default
values for these parameters are currently based on the assumption that
PAGE_SIZE = 4k.

==== Local APIC absent or disabled!

The Xenomai 2.x _nucleus_ issues this warning if the kernel
configuration enables the local APIC support
(+CONFIG_X86_LOCAL_APIC+), but the processor status gathered at boot
time by the kernel says that no local APIC support is available.
There are two options for fixing this issue:

* either your CPU really has _no_ local APIC hardware, in which case
you need to rebuild a kernel with LAPIC support disabled.

* or it does have a local APIC but the kernel boot parameters did not
specify to activate it using the _lapic_ option. The latter is
required since 2.6.9-rc4 for boxes which APIC hardware is disabled by
default by the BIOS. You may want to look at the file
'Documentation/kernel-parameters.txt' from the Linux source tree, for
more information about this parameter.

== Application-level issues

[[vsyscall]]
=== --enable-x86-sep needs NPTL and Linux 2.6.x or higher
or,

=== --enable-x86-vsyscall requires NPTL ...

This message may happen when starting a Xenomai 2.x or 3.x application
respectively. On the x86 architecture, the configure script option
mentioned allows Xenomai to use the _vsyscall_ mechanism for issuing
system calls, based on the most efficient method determined by the
kernel for the current system. This mechanism is only available from
NPTL-enabled glibc releases.

Turn off this feature for other libc flavours.

=== Cobalt core not enabled in kernel

As mentioned in the message, the target kernel is lacking Cobalt
support.  See
link:installing-xenomai-3-x/#Installing_the_Cobalt_core[this document]
for detailed information about installing Cobalt.

=== binding failed: Function not implemented

Another symptom of the previous issue, i.e. the Cobalt core is not
enabled in the target kernel.

=== binding failed: Operation not permitted

This is the result of an attempt to run a Xenomai application as an
unprivileged user, which fails because invoking Xenomai services
requires +CAP_SYS_NICE+. However, you may allow a specific group of
users to access Xenomai services, by following the instructions on
link:running-a-Xenomai-application-as-a-regular-user[this page].

=== incompatible ABI revision level

Same as below:

=== ABI mismatch

The ABI concerned by this message is the system call binary interface
between the Xenomai libraries and the real-time kernel services it
invokes (e.g. +libcobalt+ and the Cobalt kernel with Xenomai
3.x). This ABI may evolve over time, only between major Xenomai
releases or testing candidate releases (i.e. -rc series) though. When
this happens, the ABI level required by the application linked against
Xenomai libraries may not match the ABI exposed by the Xenomai
co-kernel implementation on the target machine, which is the situation
this message reports.

To fix this issue, just make sure to rebuild both the Xenomai kernel
support and the user-space binaries for your target system. If however
you did install the appropriate Xenomai binaries on your target
system, chances are that stale files from a previous Xenomai
installation still exist on your system, causing the mismatch.

Each major Xenomai release (e.g. 2.1.x, 2.2.x ... 2.6.x, 3.0.x ...)
defines such kernel/user ABI, which remains stable across minor update
releases (e.g. 2.6.0 -> 2.6.4). This guarantee makes partial updates
possible with production systems (i.e. kernel and/or user support).
For instance, any application built over the Xenomai 2.6.0 binaries
can run over a Xenomai 2.6.4 kernel support, and conversely.

[TIP]
Debian-based distributions (notably Ubuntu) may ship with
pre-installed Xenomai libraries. Make sure that these files don't get
in the way if you plan to install a more recent Xenomai kernel
support.

=== <program>: not found

Although the program in question may be present, this message may
happen on ARM platforms when a mismatch exists between the kernel and
user library configurations with respect to EABI support. Typically,
if user libraries are compiled with a toolchain generating OABI code,
the result won't run over a kernel not enabling the
+CONFIG_OABI_COMPAT+ option. Conversely, the product of a compilation
with an EABI toolchain won't run on a kernel not enabling the
+CONFIG_AEABI+ option.

=== incompatible feature set

When a Xenomai application starts, the set of core features it
requires is compared to the feature set the kernel provides. This
message denotes a mismatch between both sets, which can be solved by
fixing the kernel and/or user build configuration.  Further details
are available from link:installing-xenomai-3-x[this page] for Xenomai
3, and link:installing-xenomai-2-x[this page] for Xenomai 2.

==== feature mismatch: missing="smp/nosmp"

On SMP-capable architectures, both kernel and user-space components
(i.e. Xenomai libraries) must be compiled with the same setting with
respect to SMP support.

SMP support in the kernel is controlled via the +CONFIG_SMP+ option.
The +--enable-smp+ configuration switch enables this feature for the
Xenomai libraries (conversely, +--disable-smp+ disables it).

[CAUTION]
Using Xenomai libraries built for a single-processor configuration
(i.e. +--disable-smp+) over a SMP kernel (i.e. +CONFIG_SMP=y+) is
*NOT* valid. On the other hand, using Xenomai libraries built with SMP
support enabled over a single-processor kernel is fine.

=== Application-level issues specific to the Xenomai 2.x series

The following feature mismatches can be detected with the 2.x series:

==== feature mismatch: missing="kuser_tsc"

See the <<arm-tsc, "ARM tsc emulation issues">> section.

[NOTE]
This issue does not affect Xenomai 3.x as the latter requires modern
I-pipe series which must provide _KUSER_TSC_ support on the ARM
architecture.

==== feature mismatch: missing="sep"

This error is specific to the x86 architecture on Xenomai 2.x, for
pre-Pentium CPUs which do not provide the _sysenter/sysexit_
instruction pair. See <<vsyscall, this section>>.

[NOTE]
This issue does not affect Xenomai 3.x as the latter does not
support pre-Pentium systems in the first place.

==== feature mismatch: missing="tsc"

This error is specific to the x86 architecture on Xenomai 2.x, for
pre-Pentium CPUs which do not provide the _rdtsc_ instruction. In this
particular case, +--enable-x86-tsc+ cannot be mentioned in the
configuration options for building the user libraries, since the
processor does not support this feature.

The rule of thumb is to pick the *exact* processor for your x86
platform when configuring the kernel, at the very least the most
specific model which is close to the target CPU, not a generic
placeholder such as _i586_, for which _rdtsc_ is not available.

If your processor does not provide the _rdtsc_ instruction, you have
to pass +--disable-x86-tsc+ option to the configure script for
building the user librairies. In this case, Xenomai will provide a
(much slower) emulation of the hardware TSC.

[NOTE]
This issue does not affect Xenomai 3.x as the latter does not
support pre-Pentium systems in the first place.

[[arm-tsc]]
==== ARM tsc emulation issues

In order to allow applications to measure short durations with as
little overhead as possible, Xenomai uses a 64 bits high resolution
counter. On x86, the counter used for this purpose is the time-stamp
counter readable by the dedicated _rdtsc_ instruction.

ARM processors generally do not have a 64 bits high resolution counter
available in user-space, so this counter is emulated by reading
whatever high resolution counter is available on the processor, and
used as clock source in kernel-space, and extend it to 64 bits by
using data shared with the kernel. If Xenomai libraries are compiled
without emulated tsc support, system calls are used, which have a much
higher overhead than the emulated tsc code.

In recent versions of the I-pipe patch, SOCs generally select the
+CONFIG_IPIPE_ARM_KUSER_TSC+ option, which means that the code for
reading this counter is provided by the kernel at a predetermined
address (in the vector page, a page which is mapped at the same
address in every process) and is the code used if you do not pass the
+--enable-arm-tsc+ or +--disable-arm-tsc+ option to configure, or pass
+--enable-arm-tsc=kuser+.

This default should be fine with recent patches and most ARM
SOCs.

However, if you see the following message:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
incompatible feature set
(userland requires "kuser_tsc...", kernel provides..., missing="kuser_tsc")
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It means that you are either using an old patch, or that the SOC you
are using does not select the +CONFIG_IPIPE_ARM_KUSER_TSC+ option.

So you should resort to what Xenomai did before branch 2.6: select the
tsc emulation code when compiling Xenomai user-space support by using
the +--enable-arm-tsc+ option. The parameter passed to this option is
the name of the SOC or SOC family for which you are compiling Xenomai.
Typing:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
/patch/to/xenomai/configure --help
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

will return the list of valid values for this option.

If after having enabled this option and recompiled, you see the
following message when starting the latency test:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
kernel/user tsc emulation mismatch
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
or
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hardware tsc is not a fast wrapping one
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It means that you selected the wrong SOC or SOC family, reconfigure
Xenomai user-space support by passing the right parameter to
+--enable-arm-tsc+ and recompile.

The following message:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Your board/configuration does not allow tsc emulation
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

means that the kernel-space support for the SOC you are using does not
provide support for tsc emulation in user-space. In that case, you
should recompile Xenomai user-space support passing the
+--disable-arm-tsc+ option.

==== hardware tsc is not a fast wrapping one
or,

==== kernel/user tsc emulation mismatch
or,

==== board/configuration does not allow tsc emulation

See the <<arm-tsc, "ARM tsc emulation issues">> section.

==== native skin or CONFIG_XENO_OPT_PERVASIVE disabled

Possible reasons for this error are:

* you booted a kernel without Xenomai or I-pipe support, a kernel with
I-pipe and Xenomai support should have a '/proc/ipipe/version' and
'/proc/xenomai/version' files;

* the kernel you booted does not have the +CONFIG_XENO_SKIN_NATIVE+ and
+CONFIG_XENO_OPT_PERVASIVE+ options enabled;

* Xenomai failed to start, check the <<kerror,"Xenomai or I-pipe error
in the kernel log">> section;

* you are trying to run Xenomai user-space support compiled for x86_32
on an x86_64 kernel.

==== "warning: <service> is deprecated" while compiling kernel code

Where <service> is a thread creation service, one of:

* +cre_tsk+
* +pthread_create+
* +rt_task_create+
* +sc_tecreate+ or +sc_tcreate+
* +taskSpawn+ or +taskInit+
* +t_create+

Starting with Xenomai 3, APIs are not usable from kernel modules
anymore, at the notable exception of the RTDM device driver API, which
by essence must be used from kernel space for writing real-time device
drivers. Those warnings are there to remind you that application code
should run in user-space context instead, so that it can be ported to
Xenomai 3.

You may switch those warnings off by enabling the
+CONFIG_XENO_OPT_NOWARN_DEPRECATED+ option in your kernel
configuration, but nevertheless, you have been *WARNED*.

==== a Xenomai system call fails with code -38 (ENOSYS)

Possible reasons for this error are:

* you booted a kernel without Xenomai or I-pipe support, a kernel with
I-pipe and Xenomai support should have a '/proc/ipipe/version' and
'/proc/xenomai/version' files;

* the kernel you booted does not have the +CONFIG_XENO_SKIN_*+ option
enabled for the skin you use, or +CONFIG_XENO_OPT_PERVASIVE+ is
disabled;

* Xenomai failed to start, check the <<kerror,"Xenomai or I-pipe error
in the kernel log">> section;

* you are trying to run Xenomai user-space support compiled for x86_32
on an x86_64 kernel.

==== the application overconsumes system memory

Your user-space application unexpectedly commits a lot of virtual
memory, as reported by "+top+" or '/proc/<pid>/maps'. Sometimes OOM
situations may even appear during runtime on systems with limited
memory.

The reason is that Xenomai threads are underlaid by regular POSIX
threads, for which a large default amount of stack space memory is
commonly reserved by the POSIX threading library (8MiB per thread by
the _glibc_). Therefore, the kernel will commit as much as
_8MiB{nbsp}*{nbsp}nr_threads_ bytes to RAM space for the application,
as a side-effect of calling the +mlockall()+ service to lock the
process memory, as Xenomai requires.

This behaviour can be controlled in two ways:

- via the _stacksize_ parameter passed to the various thread creation
routines, or +pthread_attr_setstacksize()+ directly when using the
POSIX API.

- by setting a lower user-limit for the initial stack allocation from
the application's parent shell which all threads from the child
process inherit, as illustrated below:

---------------------------------------------------------------------
ulimit -s <initial-size-in-kbytes>
---------------------------------------------------------------------

==== freeze or machine lockup

Possible reasons may be:

- Stack space overflow issue now biting some real-time kernel thread?

- Spurious delay/timeout values computed by the application
(specifically: too short).

- A case of freeze is a system call called in a loop which fails
without its return value being properly checked.

On x86, whenever the nucleus watchdog does not trigger, you may want to
try disabling CONFIG_X86_UP_IOAPIC while keeping CONFIG_X86_UP_APIC, and
arm the kernel NMI watchdog on the LAPIC (nmi_watchdog=2). You may be
lucky and have a backtrace after the freeze. Maybe enabling all the
nucleus debug options would catch something too.

== Issues when running Xenomai test programs

[[latency]]
=== Issues when running the _latency_ test

The first test to run to see if Xenomai is running correctly on your
platform is the latency test. The following sections describe the
usual reasons for this test not to run correctly.

==== failed to open benchmark device

You have launched +latency -t 1+ or +latency -t 2+ which both require
the kernel to have been configured with the
+CONFIG_XENO_DRIVERS_TIMERBENCH+ option.

==== the _latency_ test hangs

The most common reason for this issues is a too short period passed
with the +-p+ option, try increasing the period. If you enable the
watchdog (option +CONFIG_XENO_OPT_WATCHDOG+, in your kernel
configuration), you should see the <<short-period, "watchdog triggered
(period too short?)">> message.

[[short-period]]
==== watchdog triggered (period too short?)

The built-in Xenomai watchdog has stopped the _latency_ test because
it was using all the CPU in pure real-time mode (aka _primary
mode_). This is likely due to a too short period.  Run the _latency_
test again, passing a longer period using the +-p+ option this time.

==== the _latency_ test shows high latencies

The _latency_ test runs, but you are seeing high latencies.

* make sure that you carefully followed the <<kconf,"Kernel
configuration" section>>.

* if running on a Raspberry Pi SBC, make sure you don't hit a firmware
issue, see https://github.com/raspberrypi/firmware/issues/497.

* if running on a x86 platform, make sure that you do not have an
issue with SMIs, see the <<SMI, section about SMIs>>.

* if running on a x86 platform with a _legacy USB_ switch available
from the BIOS configuration, try disabling it.

* if you do not have this option at BIOS configuration level, it does
not necessarily mean that there is no support for it, thus no
potential for high latencies; this support might just be forcibly
enabled at boot time. To solve this, in case your machine has some USB
controller hardware, make sure to enable the corresponding host
controller driver support in your kernel configuration. For instance,
UHCI-compliant hardware needs +CONFIG_USB_UHCI_HCD+. As part of its
init chores, the driver should reset the host controller properly,
kicking out the BIOS off the concerned hardware, and deactivate the
USB legacy mode if set in the same move.

* if you observe high latencies while running X-window, try disabling
hardware acceleration in the X-window server file. With recent
versions of X-window, try using the 'fbdev' driver. Install it
(Debian package named 'xserver-xorg-video-fbdev' for instance), then
modifiy the +Device+ section to use this driver in
'/etc/X11/xorg.conf', as in:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Section "Device"
	Identifier  "Card0"
	Driver      "fbdev"
EndSection
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
With olders versions of X-window, keep the existing driver, but
add the following line to the +Device+ section:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	Option "NoAccel"
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

=== Issues when running the _switchtest_ program

==== pthread_create: Resource temporarily unavailable

The switchtest test creates many kernel threads, an operation which
consumes memory taken from internal pools managed by the Xenomai
real-time core.

Xenomai 2.x and 3.x series require +CONFIG_XENO_OPT_SYS_HEAPSZ+ to be
large enough in the kernel configuration settings, to cope with the
allocation requests.

Xenomai 2.x may also require to increase the
+CONFIG_XENO_OPT_SYS_STACKPOOLSZ+ setting.
